---
title: "Ultimate Lingo That Will Last a Lifetime"
date: 2020-07-04T16:56:21-07:00
draft: false
---

Ultimate is a sport that came to me late in life, and was just as quickly
whisked away. Through the dense forest of change and confusion that I stepped
into at the beginning of my freshman year, the frisbee community appeared like a
guiding beacon. Over the years, this beacon grew more and more enlightening. It
taught me ideas that reached far beyond that turf fields I spent most nights of
the week kindling its flame on. Though the final stretch of our last season was
painfully cut short, these four mantras that I took from the game over the last
four years will surely last forever.

**Force Flick**

The frisbee field is large. It feels unconquerable the first time one steps foot
onto it. At 120 years long and 40 yards wide, it is almost impossible for seven
measly defenders to stop their opponents from scoring at will––without a
strategy.

"Force flick" is the first tactic anyone learns when being introduced to the
game. The defender who is guarding the player with the disc positions their body
towards one side of their opponent's body (the side of their body from which
they would throw a backhand), cutting off their ability to throw to that side of
the field and forcing them to throw to the other.  ![force
flick](/img/ultimate/forceflick.png "A typical force flick setup. The blue
circle is the offensive player with the disc, while the line next to it is the
defender with their hands outstretched. The defender is preventing the offensive
player from throwing to the red half of the field, and forcing them to throw to
the green half, where the other Xs (defenders) are positioned.") As a downfield
defender, knowing that my teammate is properly forcing flick makes performing my
job significantly easier. A good force flick halves the amount of space that I,
as a defender, need to manage. As the defender guarding the player with the
disc, I know that my teammates are trusting me to force flick. That fact alone,
that *trust* they place in me, makes me focus even harder. My job may be easy,
but it is incredibly important. I must do it right for my teammate.

Have trust in your teammates, and believe in them to do the right thing.
Likewise, make it easy for your teammates to trust you by forcing flick
effectively. Practice it, and kindle that trust. *Trust is a two-way street, and
with ample amounts of it, the entire game becomes a breeze.*


**Catch your D's**

We all surely know the feeling: you're on defense and streaking after your
matchup as the disc soars over your heads towards the deep stretches of the
field. You both jostle for position, each getting ready to leap with hands
outstretched. You calculate the optimal time to leap in a split second. You
leap, fingers rising higher than your opponents', until they make contact with
spinning plastic first. You swat at the disc, and come down in a messy tangle of
arms, legs, and turf. With a surge of glee, you think to yourself, *you've done
it*!

A second goes by and you look up, slightly wincing from the contact with the
earth, and see the disc wobbling in the air as it makes its way to the ground.
It hasn't quite hit the ground like you did yet. Suddenly, your opponent, who
had managed to land on their feet, springs forward and grabs the disc for a
completion.

You thought the work was over, but in fact, you celebrated too soon. You can
never really know you're done until the disc hits the turf. Catch your
D's. *Don't stop till you've finished the job.*

**Help Deep**

Seven excellent defenders playing person-to-person defense can still be scored
on if they aren't working together in unison. It only takes one player on
offense to juke their defender out and race to the end zone while the thrower
floats the disc out to space in front of them. To prevent this, defenses are
taught to *help deep*.

The defender furthest down the field will be looking to guard not only their
matchup, but the deep space of the field. If they see one of their teammates
getting beat deep, they'll leave their assignment to pick up the player
streaking away from their defender towards the end zone. This switch is a thing
of beauty if done right. A defense can make the offense feel completely
blanketed, as if there is simply no way to get open. One moment, they've juked
out their defender and are wide open - the next, someone else is hovering right
over them, rendering the throw unviable.  ![help
deep](/img/ultimate/helpdeep.png "The deepest defender with the red asterisk
recognizes that their teammate is beat deep. The defender will leave their
assignment to cover the circle heading towards the endzone, stopping the offense
from scoring") Effectively helping deep takes a careful evaluation of your role
as a defender. Your job is to not just shut down your matchup, but to take
account of where and when your teammates need a hand - to play good team
defense. *A team that takes care of each other and helps deep is a team that
wins.*

**Spirit of the Game**

Ultimate is a self-officiated game. It's up to the players to follow the rules,
call their fouls, and do the honest thing.

People always ask me how a self-officiated sport can be competitive. How can you
both try as hard as you can to win, and also act in your opponent's interest?
For example, we are often taught that in business, the only way to be successful
is to undermine your opponents in some way. Beat them to the market, force them
out of competition, undercut their prices, etc.

To that I say, a fierce competitiveness and a respect for the rules, game, and
opponents should not be mutually exclusive. Businesses often take shortcuts,
resulting in harsh realities for the people who aren't even making the
decisions. Just ask any Amazon warehouse employee how grueling of a task it can
be to get that prime shipment to you quicker than any other business. In chasing
after profit and glory, we sometimes undermine not only our opponents, but the
very people who's side we are supposed to be on.

Win the game, but not to the detriment of others. In the end, that trophy
sitting on the shelf will be all the more meaningful. Play the game of life by
the spirit of the game. *Play with competitiveness, honesty, respect, and
integrity.*
